---
title: 'The Brexit and What the Vote Means of US Markets'

taxonomy:
    category:
        - weiner
    tag:
        - architecture
        - photography
---

The votes have been counted and the decision has been made. Britain has voted to leave the European Union. To be sure, it was a close call. The final tally read 17.4 million for leaving and 16.1 million for staying; 52 percent against 48 percent. Technically, Britain has not yet left the European Union, as Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty will first have to be triggered. But the consequences of the vote were felt immediately the next day.  

International markets reacted to the vote with a frenzy. The UK-focused FTSE 250 stock index, a broad measure of Britain’s 250 largest companies, plummeted 12 percent in the opening hours of trade the day after the vote.  It later rebounded partially to close 7.2 percent lower. European exchanges hardly fared any better, with France’s CAC 40 falling 8 percent in Paris the same day. Half-way across the world, the Nikkei 225 index on the Tokyo Stock Exchange fell 7.92 percent on news of the referendum decision. Major stock indices in the United States also fell, but at a less frenzied rate compared to global peers. 

Global investors clearly believe the vote has major implications. But what are those implications in the grand scheme of things? In particular, what does a British withdrawal from the European Union mean for US markets? These are the questions now being posed by analysts, politicians and investors alike. Considering the market’s reaction to the vote, these questions are important indeed. But other questions lie just below the surface that may provide more information. How accurate are predictions of economic disaster as a consequence of the Brexit? Was the market’s reaction to the Brexit appropriate and proportional?

In the months leading up to vote, stock exchanges and currency markets experienced heightened volatility (frequent and large changes both up and down). As both sides of the debate ramped up their campaigns, each began making claims of extraordinary losses should the other side succeed. On the side of the Remain campaign, groups like the Bank of England and the International Monetary Fund released warnings of economic deterioration should Britain vote to leave. The consequences of leaving the EU, these groups claimed, would severely impact British trade with its European partners, reduce the global position of the pound and possibly cause a recession. 

The market in general aligned itself with these predictions, although there were a few major standouts. The British pound itself followed a slight downward trend and lost close to 5 percent between November 2015 and June 23rd, the day of the vote. Long-term bets against the currency increased as investors hoped to hedge against the perceived risk of a vote to leave. The performance of British and continental European stock exchanges hinged on the most up-to-date sentiment among British voters. Analysts digested polling data for clues. Any gains by pro-Brexit supporters in the polls and the market would take a dip (generally). After it was clear that the Leave campaign had recorded the most votes, investors began their frenzy. 

In the month since the Brexit, how have markets fared? Although British stocks plummeted the day after the vote to leave, they have since recovered. The FTSE 250 ended July at nearly the same level as one day prior to the vote. The FTSE 100, a more fine-tuned index of Britain’s largest companies, ended June on a positive note and reached a 12-month high in July. The pound experienced large scale depreciation (decrease in value) following the vote and remains at subdued levels. Just before the vote, the pound floated around 1.4558 a dollar. At the end of July, the currency floated around 1.3235 a dollar. However, this is not the first time the pound has depreciated significantly. Between June 30, 2014 and January 19, 2015 the pound fell from 1.7153 a dollar to 1.5013 a dollar. 

It may very well be the case that Britain will face economic headwinds in the coming months due to the vote, but you wouldn’t know it by looking at the country’s stock markets. Although the pound has certainly lost value, the exact impacts of this trend are difficult to measure. While some British businesses will struggle with a lower pound, others may find a weakened currency to be beneficial. International companies based in Britain will find overseas deals to be more expensive. Because of the pound’s depreciation, making purchases abroad will require more local curreny. But this trend is a two-way street. Now that the pound is cheaper, foreign investors may have more of an incentive to invest in Britain. Investing in British businesses or assets will now require less foreign currency. 

The latter trend appears to already be underway. US fast food giant McDonalds announced 5,000 additional jobs and increased expansion plans in the UK following the Brexit. Paul Pomroy, the company’s UK chief, said the Brexit created the perfect opportunity for investment and expansion. Some companies appear to be unaffected altogether. Taylor Wimpey, one of the largest housebuilders in Britain, said business conditions had not changed before or after the vote to leave. The housebuilder noted that demand for homes had not been impacted in the six months preceding the vote, nor has demand changed following the vote. Some companies operating in the EU share this view. German industrial giant Siemens said it would continue to increase investment into Britain and that the country still remains a good investment choice. Even before the vote was tallied, some British businesses appeared to benefit from the weakened pound. In May, Britain exported the largest shipment of wheat in 20 years to the United States due to the pound’s relative weakness compared to the dollar. 

Unfortunately, there are always unknown variables at play in the field of economics. While Britain could certainly see weakness in one part of its economy, it could just as easily see strength in another. Measuring the sum of these gains and losses to see the overall trend is a complicated endeavor, but that doesn’t stop analysts from trying anyway. That’s exactly what analysts at the Bank of England have done, and the results have been rather interesting. Britain’s central bank sends agents across the country to measure business conditions and sentiment through widespread business surveys. The most recent surveys suggest that the vast majority of British firms do not have plans to reduce investment or reduce hiring despite the Brexit. 

So what negative impacts await the US economy, if any, as a consequence of the Brexit? The answer to this question is similar to the negative impacts awaiting Britain. So far, Britain’s domestic economy appears to be resilient to the impacts of the Brexit. The largest and most obvious impact will be the loss of special access and privileges to the Eurozone economic bloc. Member states of the European Union enjoy mostly unfettered trade access to one another and tariffs between member states are either extremely low or nonexistent. Many of the UK’s largest trading partners are European. In 2014, the EU accounted for up to 44.6 percent of British exports and 53.2 percent of imports. However, the Office for National Statistics suggests that the importance of European trade has been “falling consistently since 1999”. As emerging markets rise, they swallow up a larger percentage of British trade. 

While the European Union remains a major source of trade for Britain, despite the bloc’s ever decreasing role, there one particular form of trade that some British are very much interesting in keeping. London’s status as a global financial center partially hinges on Britain’s inclusion in the European Union. While the city itself has a long-standing history of finance, it enjoys enormous financial advantages by being included in the EU. The combination of Britain’s refusal to accept the euro and the access to the Eurozone has elevated London as a top destination for European securities trading activity. Trillions of euros flow through London’s financial institutions each year. A multitude of both private and public reports indicate that European regulators will no longer tolerate this reality should Britain leave the European Union. 

Herein lies US market interest in the Brexit. The behemoth that is the US economy will mostly ignore the Brexit, but some of America’s largest banks are dissatisfied with Britain’s decision. While Britain sits at $2.849 trillion GDP, the United States is floating around $18 trillion GDP. According to data compiled by the Commerce Department, the Census Bureau and the Economic Indicators Division, Britain is America’s seventh largest trading partner. However, due America’s massive trade volumes with Canada, China and Mexico, the UK is a distant seventh, representing less than 3 percent of imports and less than 5 percent of exports. The US dollar far outweighs the British pound in terms of global trading volumes and importance. While some US investors and institutions may hold pound-denominated investments that have now lost value, the impact will be marginal relative to dollar-denominated investments. 

Additionally, similar to the performance of British stocks, the US is pushing forward past the Brexit. In July, both the S&P 500 and the Dow Jones industrial average reached all-time record highs. The United States is the single only developed nation considering raising interest rates again, a move that is viewed as a sign of relative economic health. The current global economic slowdown has certainly impacted corporate earnings in the US, but far less than other major regions. In fact, major companies like Facebook, Alphabet (Google’s new parent company), Coca-Cola, Amazon, Dow Chemical and others have all recently reported better-than-expect earnings. All of this just one month after the Brexit. 

Why then have US financial institutions taken such a strong position against the Brexit? Wall St giant JP Morgan Chase, the largest investment bank in the world, has been one of the most outspoken American critics of the Brexit. The bank’s chief executive Jamie Dimon has stated on multiple occasions that JP Morgan may have to consider its own mini-Brexit. Dimon revealed the United States’ economic interest in the Brexit with his comments. 

“We need a passport rule, like the one we have now in London,” said Dimon to Italian newspaper Il Sore 24 Ore. “If we have that passport after Brexit, we likely would not have to make any change at all. But I think the European Union will not accept that. It will put more conditions on the UK and might force banks to become smaller in London.”

The lack of free flowing capital from London into the Eurozone economic bloc would be a major setback for US banks with financial interests in Europe. While the US economy will likely not feel the impacts of a Brexit, American banks will. Europe is a popular destination for US investment and US financial institutions have been using London as a gateway into this economic bloc. Once London no longer offers these advantages, American banks will find European investment opportunities more expensive and more difficult to find. 

There is one other trend impacting US markets as a consequence of the Brexit. The fallout of the vote to leave left markets in a panic. When markets get worried, investors tend to flee to what are known as “safe haven assets”. Gold is one of the most popular safe haven assets. It is a commodity that is universally accepted and in high demand. Assets like gold are viewed as a safe place to store money when financial and economic institutions seem too risky. US government debt in the form of Treasury notes (bonds) are also considered a safe haven. Due to the position of the US economy in the world, US government debt is viewed as extremely safe. As noted by various institutions, including Reuters and Moody’s, safe haven assets surged following the Brexit. International investors poured into US Treasuries and stocks to avoid any potential risks in British and European markets.